OpenBSM 1.0

  Introduction

OpenBSM provides an open source implementation of Sun's BSM Audit API. 
Originally created under contract to Apple Computer by McAfee Research, this
implementation is now maintained by volunteers and the generous contribution
of several organizations.  Coupled with a kernel audit implementation,
OpenBSM can be used to maintain system audit streams, and is a foundation for
an Audit-enabled system.  Portions of OpenBSM, including include files and
token-building routines, are reusable in a kernel audit implementation, and
may be found in the FreeBSD and Mac OS X kernels.

  Contents

OpenBSM consists of several directories:

    bin/           Audit-related command line tools
    bsm/           System include files for BSM
    compat/        Compatibility code to build on various OS's
    etc/           Sample /etc/security configuration files
    libbsm/        Implementation of BSM library interfaces and man pages
    man/           System call and configuration file man pages
    modules/       Directory for auditfilterd module source
    test/          Test token sets and geneneration program
    tools/         Tool directory, including audump to dump databases

The following programs are included with OpenBSM:

    audit          Command line audit control tool
    auditd         Audit management daemon
    auditfilterd   Experimental event monitoring framework
    auditreduce    Audit trail reduction tool
    audump         Debugging tool to parse and print audit databases
    praudit        Tool to print audit trails

  Building

OpenBSM is currently built using autoconf and automake, which should allow
for building on a range of operating systems, including FreeBSD, Mac OS X,
and Linux.  Depending on the availability of audit facilities in the
underlying operating system, some components that depend on kernel audit
support are built conditionally.  Typically, build will be performed using:

    ./configure
    make

To install, use:

    make install

You may wish to specify that the OpenBSM components not be installed in the
base system, rather in a specific directory.  This may be done using the
--prefix argument to configure.  If installing to a specific directory,
remember to update your library path so that running tools from that
directory the correct libbsm is used:

    ./configure --prefix=/home/rwatson/openbsm
    make
    make install
    LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/home/rwatson/openbsm/libbsm ; export LD_LIBRARY_PATH

You will need to manually propagate openbsm/etc/* into /etc on your system;
this is not done automatically so as to avoid disrupting the current
configuration.  Currently, the locations of these files is not configurable.

  Credits

The following organizations and individuals have contributed substantially to
the development of OpenBSM:

    Apple Computer, Inc.
    McAfee Research, McAfee, Inc.
    SPARTA, Inc.
    Robert Watson
    Wayne Salamon
    Suresh Krishnaswamy
    Kevin Van Vechten
    Tom Rhodes
    Wojciech Koszek
    Chunyang Yuan
    Poul-Henning Kamp
    Christian Brueffer
    Olivier Houchard
    Christian Peron
    Martin Fong
    Pawel Worach
    Martin Englund
    Ruslan Ermilov
    Martin Voros
    Diego Giagio
    Alex Samorukov

In addition, Coverity, Inc.'s Prevent(tm) static analysis tool and Gimpel
Software's FlexeLint tool were used to identify a number of bugs in the
OpenBSM implementation.

  Contributions

The TrustedBSD Project would appreciate the contribution of bug fixes, 
enhancements, etc, under identically or substantially similar licenses to 
those present on the remainder of the OpenBSM source code.

  Location

Information on OpenBSM may be found on the OpenBSM home page:

    http://www.OpenBSM.org/

Information on TrustedBSD may be found on the TrustedBSD home page:

    http://www.TrustedBSD.org/

$P4: //depot/projects/trustedbsd/openbsm/README#24 $
