Updating Information for FreeBSD STABLE users

This file is maintained and copyrighted by M. Warner Losh
<imp@village.org>.  See end of file for further details.  For commonly
done items, please see the COMMON ITEMS: section later in the file.

Items affecting the ports and packages system can be found in
/usr/ports/UPDATING.  Please read that file before running
portupgrade.

20060817:
	ksh has been added to the base system.  If you previously had
	the port installed, it will be overwritten on the next buildworld.

20060211:
	An IPv6 support of ipfw was enabled by default.  If you don't
	want to filter an IPv6 by ipfw, please add following line into
	your ipfw rule:

		pass ip6 from any to any

20060210:
	Now most modules get their build-time options from the kernel
	configuration file.  A few modules still have fixed options
	due to their non-conformant implementation, but they will be
	corrected eventually.  You may need to review the options of
	the modules in use, explicitly specify the non-default options
	in the kernel configuration file, and rebuild the kernel and
	modules afterwards.

20060122:
	/etc/rc.d/ppp-user has been renamed to /etc/rc.d/ppp.
	Its /etc/rc.conf.d configuration file has been `ppp' from
	the beginning, and hence there is no need to touch it.

20060113:
	si(4)'s device files now contain the unit number.
	Uses of {cua,tty}A[0-9a-f] should be replaced by {cua,tty}A0[0-9a-f].
	
20051230:
	A lot of fixes and new features in the soundsystem. To get all
	benefits, you may want to recompile mplayer (if installed) after
	booting the new world.

20051222:
	Bug fixes to the trimdomain(3) function in libutil may result in
	slight changes to the host names appearing in log files under
	relatively rare circumstances.

20051220:
	Scripts in the local_startup directories (as defined in
	/etc/defaults/rc.conf) that have the new rc.d semantics will
	now be run as part of the base system rcorder. If there are
	errors or problems with one of these local scripts, it could
	cause boot problems. If you encounter such problems, boot in
	single user mode, remove that script from the */rc.d directory.
	Please report the problem to the port's maintainer, and the
	freebsd-ports@freebsd.org mailing list.

20051215:
	The setkey(8) utility was moved from /usr/sbin/setkey to /sbin/setkey.
	You may want to update scripts which depend on its location.

20051108:
	rp(4)'s device files now contain the unit number.
	Uses of {cua,tty}R[0-9a-f] should be replaced by {cua,tty}R0[0-9a-f].

20051101:
	FreeBSD 6.0-RELEASE

20051001:
	kern.polling.enable sysctl MIB is now deprecated. Use ifconfig(8)
	to turn polling(4) on your interfaces.

20050722:
	The ai_addrlen of a struct addrinfo was changed to a socklen_t
	to conform to POSIX-2001.  This change broke an ABI
	compatibility on 64 bit architecture.  You have to recompile
	userland programs that use getaddrinfo(3) on 64 bit
	architecture.

20050711:
	RELENG_6 branched here.

20050629:
	The pccard_ifconfig rc.conf variable has been removed and a new
	variable, ifconfig_DEFAULT has been introduced.  Unlike
	pccard_ifconfig, ifconfig_DEFAULT applies to ALL interfaces that
	do not have ifconfig_ifn entries rather than just those in
	removable_interfaces.

20050616:
	Some previous versions of PAM have permitted the use of
	non-absolute paths in /etc/pam.conf or /etc/pam.d/* when referring
	to third party PAM modules in /usr/local/lib.  A change has been
	made to require the use of absolute paths in order to avoid
	ambiguity and dependence on library path configuration, which may
	affect existing configurations.

20050610:
	Major changes to network interface API.  All drivers must be
	recompiled.  Drivers not in the base system will need to be
	updated to the new APIs.

20050609:
	Changes were made to kinfo_proc in sys/user.h.  Please recompile
	userland, or commands like `fstat', `pkill', `ps', `top' and `w'
	will not behave correctly.

	The API and ABI for hwpmc(4) have changed with the addition
	of sampling support.  Please recompile lib/libpmc(3) and
	usr.sbin/{pmcstat,pmccontrol}.

20050606:
	The OpenBSD dhclient was imported in place of the ISC dhclient
	and the network interface configuration scripts were updated
	accordingly.  If you use DHCP to configure your interfaces, you
	must now run devd.  Also, DNS updating was lost so you will need
	to find a workaround if you use this feature.

20050605:
	if_bridge was added to the tree. This has changed struct ifnet.
	Please recompile userland and all network related modules.

20050603:
	The n_net of a struct netent was changed to an uint32_t, and
	1st argument of getnetbyaddr() was changed to an uint32_t, to
	conform to POSIX-2001.  These changes broke an ABI
	compatibility on 64 bit architecture.  With these changes,
	shlib major of libpcap was bumped.  You have to recompile
	userland programs that use getnetbyaddr(3), getnetbyname(3),
	getnetent(3) and/or libpcap on 64 bit architecture.

20050528:
	Kernel parsing of extra options on '#!' first lines of shell
	scripts has changed.  Lines with multiple options likely will
	fail after this date.  For full details, please see
		http://people.freebsd.org/~gad/Updating-20050528.txt

20050503:
	The packet filter (pf) code has been updated to OpenBSD 3.7
	Please note the changed anchor syntax and the fact that
	authpf(8) now needs a mounted fdescfs(5) to function.

20050415:
	The NO_MIXED_MODE kernel option has been removed from the i386
	amd64 platforms as its use has been superceded by the new local
	APIC timer code.  Any kernel config files containing this option
	should be updated.

20050227:
	The on-disk format of LC_CTYPE files was changed to be machine
	independent.  Please make sure NOT to use NO_CLEAN buildworld
	when crossing this point. Crossing this point also requires
	recompile or reinstall of all locale depended packages.

20050225:
	The ifi_epoch member of struct if_data has been changed to
	contain the uptime at which the interface was created or the
	statistics zeroed rather then the wall clock time because
	wallclock time may go backwards.  This should have no impact
	unless an snmp implementation is using this value (I know of
	none at this point.)

20050224:
	The acpi_perf and acpi_throttle drivers are now part of the
	acpi(4) main module.  They are no longer built separately.

20050223:
	The layout of struct image_params has changed. You have to
	recompile all compatibility modules (linux, svr4, etc) for use
	with the new kernel.

20050223:
	The p4tcc driver has been merged into cpufreq(4).  This makes
	"options CPU_ENABLE_TCC" obsolete.  Please load cpufreq.ko or
	compile in "device cpufreq" to restore this functionality.

20050220:
	The responsibility of recomputing the file system summary of
	a SoftUpdates-enabled dirty volume has been transferred to the
	background fsck.  A rebuild of fsck(8) utility is recommended
	if you have updated the kernel.

	To get the old behavior (recompute file system summary at mount
	time), you can set vfs.ffs.compute_summary_at_mount=1 before
	mounting the new volume.

20050206:
	The cpufreq import is complete.  As part of this, the sysctls for
	acpi(4) throttling have been removed.  The power_profile script
	has been updated, so you can use performance/economy_cpu_freq in
	rc.conf(5) to set AC on/offline cpu frequencies.

20050206:
	NG_VERSION has been increased. Recompiling kernel (or ng_socket.ko)
	requires recompiling libnetgraph and userland netgraph utilities.

20050114:
	Support for abbreviated forms of a number of ipfw options is
	now deprecated.  Warnings are printed to stderr indicating the
	correct full form when a match occurs.  Some abbreviations may
	be supported at a later date based on user feedback.  To be
	considered for support, abbreviations must be in use prior to
	this commit and unlikely to be confused with current key words.

20041221:
	By a popular demand, a lot of NOFOO options were renamed
	to NO_FOO (see bsd.compat.mk for a full list).  The old
	spellings are still supported, but will cause annoying
	warnings on stderr.  Make sure you upgrade properly (see
	the COMMON ITEMS: section later in this file).

20041219:
	Auto-loading of ancillary wlan modules such as wlan_wep has
	been temporarily disabled; you need to statically configure
	the modules you need into your kernel or explicitly load them
	prior to use.  Specifically, if you intend to use WEP encryption
	with an 802.11 device load/configure wlan_wep; if you want to
	use WPA with the ath driver load/configure wlan_tkip, wlan_ccmp,
	and wlan_xauth as required.

20041213:
	The behaviour of ppp(8) has changed slightly.  If lqr is enabled
	(``enable lqr''), older versions would revert to LCP ECHO mode on
	negotiation failure.  Now, ``enable echo'' is required for this
	behaviour.  The ppp version number has been bumped to 3.4.2 to
	reflect the change.

20041201:
	The wlan support has been updated to split the crypto support
	into separate modules.  For static WEP you must configure the
	wlan_wep module in your system or build and install the module
	in place where it can be loaded (the kernel will auto-load
	the module when a wep key is configured).

20041201:
	The ath driver has been updated to split the tx rate control
	algorithm into a separate module.  You need to include either
	ath_rate_onoe or ath_rate_amrr when configuring the kernel.

20041116:
	Support for systems with an 80386 CPU has been removed.  Please
	use FreeBSD 5.x or earlier on systems with an 80386.

20041110:
	We have had a hack which would mount the root filesystem
	R/W if the device were named 'md*'.  As part of the vnode
	work I'm doing I have had to remove this hack.  People
	building systems which use preloaded MD root filesystems
	may need to insert a "/sbin/mount -u -o rw /dev/md0 /" in
	their /etc/rc scripts.

20041104:
	FreeBSD 5.3 shipped here.

20041102:
	The size of struct tcpcb has changed again due to the removal
	of RFC1644 T/TCP.  You have to recompile userland programs that
	read kmem for tcp sockets directly (netstat, sockstat, etc.)

20041022:
	The size of struct tcpcb has changed.  You have to recompile
	userland programs that read kmem for tcp sockets directly
	(netstat, sockstat, etc.)

20041016:
	RELENG_5 branched here.  For older entries, please see updating
	in the RELENG_5 branch.

COMMON ITEMS:

	General Notes
	-------------
	Avoid using make -j when upgrading.  From time to time in the
	past there have been problems using -j with buildworld and/or
	installworld.  This is especially true when upgrading between
	"distant" versions (eg one that cross a major release boundary
	or several minor releases, or when several months have passed
	on the -current branch).

	Sometimes, obscure build problems are the result of environment
	poisoning.  This can happen because the make utility reads its
	environment when searching for values for global variables.
	To run your build attempts in an "environmental clean room",
	prefix all make commands with 'env -i '.  See the env(1) manual
	page for more details.

	Due to several updates to the build infrastructure, source
	upgrades from versions prior to 5.3 no longer supported.

	When upgrading from one major version to another it is generally
	best to upgrade to the latest code in the currently installed branch
	first, then do an upgrade to the new branch. This is the best-tested
	upgrade path, and has the highest probability of being successful.
	Please try this approach before reporting problems with a major
	version upgrade.

	To build a kernel
	-----------------
	If you are updating from a prior version of FreeBSD (even one just
	a few days old), you should follow this procedure. With a
	/usr/obj tree with a fresh buildworld,
	make -DALWAYS_CHECK_MAKE buildkernel KERNCONF=YOUR_KERNEL_HERE
	make -DALWAYS_CHECK_MAKE installkernel KERNCONF=YOUR_KERNEL_HERE

	To test a kernel once
	---------------------
	If you just want to boot a kernel once (because you are not sure
	if it works, or if you want to boot a known bad kernel to provide
	debugging information) run
	make installkernel KERNCONF=YOUR_KERNEL_HERE KODIR=/boot/testkernel
	nextboot -k testkernel

	To just build a kernel when you know that it won't mess you up
	--------------------------------------------------------------
	This assumes you are already running a 6.X system.  Replace
	${arch} with the architecture of your machine (e.g. "i386",
	"alpha", "amd64", "ia64", "pc98", "sparc64", etc).

	cd src/sys/${arch}/conf
	config KERNEL_NAME_HERE
	cd ../compile/KERNEL_NAME_HERE
	make depend
	make
	make install

	If this fails, go to the "To build a kernel" section.

	To rebuild everything and install it on the current system.
	-----------------------------------------------------------
	# Note: sometimes if you are running current you gotta do more than
	# is listed here if you are upgrading from a really old current.

	<make sure you have good level 0 dumps>
	make buildworld
	make kernel KERNCONF=YOUR_KERNEL_HERE
							[1]
	<reboot in single user>				[3]
	mergemaster -p					[5]
	make installworld
	make delete-old
	mergemaster					[4]
	<reboot>


	To cross-install current onto a separate partition
	--------------------------------------------------
	# In this approach we use a separate partition to hold
	# current's root, 'usr', and 'var' directories.   A partition
	# holding "/", "/usr" and "/var" should be about 2GB in
	# size.

	<make sure you have good level 0 dumps>
	<boot into -stable>
	make buildworld
	make buildkernel KERNCONF=YOUR_KERNEL_HERE
	<maybe newfs current's root partition>
	<mount current's root partition on directory ${CURRENT_ROOT}>
	make installworld DESTDIR=${CURRENT_ROOT}
	cd src/etc; make distribution DESTDIR=${CURRENT_ROOT} # if newfs'd
	make installkernel KERNCONF=YOUR_KERNEL_HERE DESTDIR=${CURRENT_ROOT}
	cp /etc/fstab ${CURRENT_ROOT}/etc/fstab 		   # if newfs'd
	<edit ${CURRENT_ROOT}/etc/fstab to mount "/" from the correct partition>
	<reboot into current>
	<do a "native" rebuild/install as described in the previous section>
	<maybe install compatibility libraries from src/lib/compat>
 	<reboot>


	To upgrade in-place from 5.x-stable or higher to 6.x-stable
	-----------------------------------------------------------
	<make sure you have good level 0 dumps>
	make buildworld					[9]
	make kernel KERNCONF=YOUR_KERNEL_HERE		[8]
							[1]
	<reboot in single user>				[3]
	mergemaster -p					[5]
	make installworld
	make delete-old
	mergemaster -i					[4]
	<reboot>

	Make sure that you've read the UPDATING file to understand the
	tweaks to various things you need.  At this point in the life
	cycle of current, things change often and you are on your own
	to cope.  The defaults can also change, so please read ALL of
	the UPDATING entries.

	Also, if you are tracking -current, you must be subscribed to
	freebsd-current@freebsd.org.  Make sure that before you update
	your sources that you have read and understood all the recent
	messages there.  If in doubt, please track -stable which has
	much fewer pitfalls.

	[1] If you have third party modules, such as vmware, you
	should disable them at this point so they don't crash your
	system on reboot.

	[3] From the bootblocks, boot -s, and then do
		fsck -p
		mount -u /
		mount -a
		cd src
		adjkerntz -i		# if CMOS is wall time
	Also, when doing a major release upgrade, it is required that
	you boot into single user mode to do the installworld.

	[4] Note: This step is non-optional.  Failure to do this step
	can result in a significant reduction in the functionality of the
	system.  Attempting to do it by hand is not recommended and those
	that pursue this avenue should read this file carefully, as well
	as the archives of freebsd-current and freebsd-hackers mailing lists
	for potential gotchas.

	[5] Usually this step is a noop.  However, from time to time
	you may need to do this if you get unknown user in the following
	step.  It never hurts to do it all the time.

	[8] In order to have a kernel that can run the 5.x binaries
	needed to do an installworld, you must include the COMPAT_FREEBSD5
	option in your kernel.  Failure to do so may leave you with a system
	that is hard to boot to recover. A similar kernel option COMPAT_FREEBSD5
	is required to run the 5.x binaries on more recent kernels.

	Make sure that you merge any new devices from GENERIC since the
	last time you updated your kernel config file.

	[9] When checking out sources, you must include the -P flag to have
	cvs prune empty directories.

	If CPUTYPE is defined in your /etc/make.conf, make sure to use the
	"?=" instead of the "=" assignment operator, so that buildworld can
	override the CPUTYPE if it needs to.

	MAKEOBJDIRPREFIX must be defined in an environment variable, and
	not on the command line, or in /etc/make.conf.  buildworld will
	warn if it is improperly defined.
FORMAT:

This file contains a list, in reverse chronological order, of major
breakages in tracking -STABLE.  Not all things will be listed here,
and it only starts on October 16, 2004.  Updating files can found in
previous releases if your system is older than this.

Copyright information:

Copyright 1998-2005 M. Warner Losh.  All Rights Reserved.

Redistribution, publication, translation and use, with or without
modification, in full or in part, in any form or format of this
document are permitted without further permission from the author.

THIS DOCUMENT IS PROVIDED BY WARNER LOSH ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL WARNER LOSH BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT,
INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
(INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING
IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

If you find this document useful, and you want to, you may buy the
author a beer.

Contact Warner Losh if you have any questions about your use of
this document.

$FreeBSD: src/UPDATING,v 1.416.2.18 2006/02/22 11:51:57 yar Exp $
