.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Rob Augustinus
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Lucas Holt
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd March 23, 2026
.Dt AMDCPPC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm amdcppc
.Nd AMD CPPC (Collaborative Processor Performance Control) CPU frequency scaling driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel, place the following lines in the
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device amd_cppc"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a module at boot time, place the
following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Li "amdcppc_load=YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver enables fine-grained CPU frequency scaling on AMD Zen 3+ processors
using the CPPC2 (Collaborative Processor Performance Control) MSR
(Model-Specific Register) interface.
This replaces the legacy P-state mechanism
.Pq Xr hwpstate 4 No or Cool'n'Quiet
which exposes only a handful of discrete frequency steps.
.Pp
.Nm
allows the CPU to autonomously manage its frequency within bounds set by the
operating system, guided by an Energy Performance Preference (EPP) hint.
This enables much lower idle frequencies and smoother scaling than legacy
P-states, resulting in improved power efficiency and thermal performance.
.Pp
The driver operates in two modes:
.Bl -tag -width "Autonomous Mode"
.It Autonomous Mode
The CPU independently selects frequencies between the minimum and maximum
performance levels set by the OS, based on the EPP preference and workload
characteristics.
.It Guided Mode
The driver requests a specific performance level, which the CPU may honor
or adjust based on thermal and power constraints.
.El
.Sh HARDWARE SUPPORT
The
.Nm
driver requires:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
An AMD processor of Family 17h (Zen) or newer
.It
CPPC support in the CPU (indicated by the CPPC bit in CPUID leaf 0x80000008)
.It
BIOS/UEFI support for CPPC (must be enabled in firmware settings)
.El
.Pp
Known supported architectures:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
AMD Ryzen 3000 series (Zen 3)
.It
AMD Ryzen 5000 series (Zen 3)
.It
AMD Ryzen 6000 series (Zen 3+)
.It
AMD Ryzen 7000 series (Zen 4)
.It
Other Family 19h+ processors with CPPC support
.El
.Sh LOADER TUNABLES
The following tunables are available as both
.Xr loader.conf 5
variables and
.Xr sysctl 8
knobs:
.Bl -tag -width "hw.cpufreq.resolution"
.It Va hint.amd_cppc.disabled
Set this device hint to 1 to disable the driver entirely.
.It Va debug.amd_cppc_verbose
Enable verbose debugging output for driver operations.
Set to 1 to display CPPC initialization, frequency changes, and EPP adjustments
on the system console.
.El
.Sh SYSCTL INTERFACE
Per-CPU tunables are available via
.Xr sysctl 8
under
.Va dev.cpu.N.freq
where N is the CPU number:
.Bl -tag -width "highest_perf"
.It Va dev.cpu.N.freq_levels
A read-only list of available frequency/voltage operating points (generated
from the CPPC performance range).
.It Va dev.cpu.N.freq
Get or set the current frequency preference in MHz.
When set, this becomes the maximum performance cap for that CPU.
.It Va dev.cpu.N.amd_cppc.epp
Get or set the Energy Performance Preference (EPP) for the CPU.
Range: 0 (maximum performance) to 100 (maximum efficiency).
Default: 50 (balanced).
Changes take effect immediately if CPPC is enabled.
.It Va dev.cpu.N.amd_cppc.highest_perf
Read-only hardware capability: maximum performance level (0-255).
.It Va dev.cpu.N.amd_cppc.nominal_perf
Read-only hardware capability: sustained performance level (0-255).
.It Va dev.cpu.N.amd_cppc.lowest_perf
Read-only hardware capability: minimum performance level (0-255).
.El
.Sh FREQUENCY REPRESENTATION
The driver exposes frequencies in MHz to the
.Xr cpufreq 4
framework using the relationship:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
frequency (MHz) = base_frequency × perf_level / nominal_perf
.Ed
.Pp
The base frequency is derived from the Time Stamp Counter (TSC) frequency.
The driver generates approximately 30 evenly-spaced frequency steps between
the highest and lowest performance levels.
.Sh ENERGY PERFORMANCE PREFERENCE (EPP)
The EPP field guides the CPU's autonomous frequency selection:
.Bl -tag -width "Value"
.It Value
Semantics
.It 0
Maximum performance: CPU favors speed over power consumption
.It 25-50
Balanced to performance-biased: moderate balance with performance preference
.It 50
Balanced: equal weight for performance and efficiency
.It 75-100
Balanced to efficiency-biased: moderate balance with efficiency preference
.It 100
Maximum efficiency: CPU favors power saving over performance
.El
.Pp
EPP can be adjusted dynamically via
.Xr sysctl 8
without driver reload.
.Sh POWER MANAGEMENT INTEGRATION
The
.Nm
driver integrates with MidnightBSD's
.Xr cpufreq 4
framework:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
Registers available frequency settings during attach
.It
Responds to frequency change requests from
.Xr powerd 8
and other cpufreq clients
.It
Supports suspend/resume: CPPC is disabled during suspend and re-enabled on resume
.It
Preserves user EPP and frequency preferences across suspend/resume cycles
.El
.Sh DRIVER BEHAVIOR
.Ss Initialization
On attach, the driver:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
Checks processor support via CPUID
.It
Reads CPPC capabilities from the CAP1 MSR
.It
Derives base frequency from the TSC
.It
Enables CPPC mode on the target CPU
.It
Sets initial defaults: EPP=50 (balanced), max_perf=highest, min_perf=lowest
.It
Registers with the cpufreq framework
.El
.Ss Frequency Changes
When a frequency change is requested:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
The driver translates the requested frequency (MHz) to a CPPC performance level
.It
Sets the performance cap (max_perf) to the requested level
.It
Leaves min_perf and EPP unchanged
.It
Writes the CPPC request register via MSR
.It
The CPU autonomously scales between min_perf and max_perf
.El
.Ss Suspend/Resume
During suspend:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
CPPC is disabled on the CPU
.It
The request register is zeroed
.It
CPPC enable bit is cleared in the firmware
.El
.Pp
During resume:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
Capabilities are re-read from the CAP1 MSR
.It
CPPC is re-enabled on the CPU
.It
Previous EPP and frequency preferences are restored
.El
.Sh DEBUGGING
Enable verbose output with:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Li "sysctl debug.amd_cppc_verbose=1"
.Ed
.Pp
This will log to the system console:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
CPPC enable/disable events
.It
EPP changes with hardware equivalents
.It
Frequency changes with requested and actual performance levels
.El
.Pp
To view kernel logs:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Li "dmesg | grep amd_cppc"
.Ed
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Ss Set EPP to maximum efficiency
.Bd -literal -offset indent
sysctl dev.cpu.0.amd_cppc.epp=100
.Ed
.Ss Set EPP to maximum performance
.Bd -literal -offset indent
sysctl dev.cpu.0.amd_cppc.epp=0
.Ed
.Ss Lock CPU 0 to 2.5 GHz
.Bd -literal -offset indent
sysctl dev.cpu.0.freq=2500
.Ed
.Ss View current frequency and capabilities
.Bd -literal -offset indent
sysctl dev.cpu.0.freq
sysctl dev.cpu.0.amd_cppc.highest_perf
sysctl dev.cpu.0.amd_cppc.nominal_perf
sysctl dev.cpu.0.amd_cppc.lowest_perf
.Ed
.Ss Enable verbose debugging
.Bd -literal -offset indent
sysctl debug.amd_cppc_verbose=1
.Ed
.Ss View available frequency steps
.Bd -literal -offset indent
sysctl dev.cpu.0.freq_levels
.Ed
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
The driver may report the following errors:
.Bl -tag -width "invalid CPPC capabilities"
.It "CPPC not supported"
The processor does not support CPPC, or it is not enabled in BIOS.
.It "unable to determine base frequency"
The TSC frequency could not be determined; frequency scaling will not work.
.It "invalid CPPC capabilities on CPU N"
The CAP1 MSR returned invalid or zero values for performance capabilities.
.It "inconsistent CPPC capabilities on CPU N"
The performance hierarchy is invalid (e.g., lowest
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Mx 4.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
This driver was written by
.An "Rob Augustinus" .
This manual page was written by
.An lucas Holt Aq Mt luke@foolishgames.com .
.Sh BUGS
The driver does not support suspend and resume or being unloaded
after boot. 

