.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2011 Lucas Holt
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 Rui Paulo
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $MidnightBSD: src/share/man/man4/amdtemp.4,v 1.1 2009/12/28 19:38:40 laffer1 Exp $
.\"
.Dd February 17, 2011
.Dt AMDTEMP 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm amdtemp
.Nd device driver for AMD K8, K10 and K11 on-die digital thermal sensor
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device amdtemp"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
amdtemp_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the on-die digital thermal sensor present
in AMD K8, K10, and K11 processors.
.Pp
The 
.Nm
driver creates entries in hw.sensors.hostb4.* for temperature sensors
on the CPU. Each temp[n] corresponds to the max reading of two sensors
on K10 and K11 processors.
.Sh BUGS
AMD K9 is not supported because temperature reporting has been replaced
by Maltese.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr systat 1 ,
.Xr sysctl 3 ,
.Xr sensorsd 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 7.1 
and 
.Mx 0.3 .
It was rewritten to use the sensors framework in 
.Mx 0.4 .

.Sh AUTHORS
.An
.An Rui Paulo Aq rpaulo@FreeBSD.org
.An Norikatsu Shigemura Aq nork@FreeBSD.org
.An Lucas Holt Aq luke@foolishgames.com
