.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Lucas Holt
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHORS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd June 11, 2026
.Dt SCHED_MIC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sched_mic
.Nd hybrid-core-aware scheduler
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "options SCHED_MIC"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
scheduler, also known as Michaelangelo, is derived from
.Xr sched_ule 4
and retains all of its behavior, adding awareness of heterogeneous
.Pq Dq hybrid
CPU cores on x86 systems.
On processors that mix fast and efficient cores it weighs four core
priority classes when placing a thread, preferring, in order:
.Pp
.Bl -enum -compact -offset indent
.It
performance cores
.Pq Intel P-cores, AMD 3D V-Cache CCD cores ;
.It
efficiency cores
.Pq Intel E-cores, AMD compute-CCD cores, AMD mobile \(dqC\(dq cores ;
.It
the second SMT thread of an already busy core; and
.It
Intel low-power
.Pq LP-E
cores, which are used last.
.El
.Pp
The preference is a soft, tunable bias applied only when selecting a CPU
for a thread; the long-term load balancer and work stealing remain
unaware of core class and continue to balance by real load.
On homogeneous hardware, and on architectures other than x86,
.Nm
behaves identically to
.Xr sched_ule 4 .
.Pp
Core class is detected per-CPU at boot.
Intel performance and efficiency cores are distinguished using the
CPUID hybrid core-type leaf;
AMD cache and compute dies are distinguished by comparing per-die
last-level cache sizes.
Processors that are not recognized as hybrid, and symmetric or
single-die parts, are treated entirely as performance cores.
.Pp
Because
.Nm
is derived from
.Xr sched_ule 4 ,
all of that scheduler's
.Va kern.sched
sysctls apply.
The following additional sysctls control hybrid-core placement:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va kern.sched.class_weight_eff
Load penalty added to efficiency-class cores
.Pq class 2 .
.It Va kern.sched.class_weight_lp
Load penalty added to low-power
.Pq LP-E, class 4
cores, scheduled last.
.It Va kern.sched.smt_busy_penalty
Penalty applied to a free thread whose SMT sibling is busy.
Setting this to
.Li 0
restores the SMT placement behavior of
.Xr sched_ule 4 .
.It Va kern.sched.prefer_compute
For AMD hybrid CCD parts, selects which die is preferred:
.Li 0
.Pq the default
favors the 3D V-Cache die, while
.Li 1
favors the compute
.Pq frequency
die.
.It Va kern.sched.detect_lpe
A boot-time tunable that enables detection of Intel LP-E cores as class 4.
Setting it to
.Li 0
leaves those cores in the efficiency class.
.It Va kern.sched.core_class
This read-only sysctl reports the detected class of each CPU as a list of
.Dq Va cpuid : Ns Va class
pairs, where class 1 is performance, 2 efficiency, and 4 low-power.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sched_4bsd 4 ,
.Xr sched_ule 4 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
scheduler first appeared in
.Mx 4.0 .
It was named after Michaelangelo the cat.
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
scheduler was derived from the
.Xr sched_ule 4
scheduler by
.An Jeff Roberson Aq Mt jeff@FreeBSD.org .
