*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0.10-pre:

- minor new ports:
	ia64-unknown-linux-rh2.1AS (Red Hat Itanium Advanced Server)
	i386-unknown-freebsd5.0 (5.0-RELEASE)
	sparc64-unknown-linux-suse7.3
	i386-unknown-freebsd4.9
	i386-unknown-freebsd5.2 (5.2-RELEASE)

- new amd.conf directive "nfs_allow_insecure_port". Used to work around
  bugs in certain kernels, which cause them to try and talk to amd from
  unprivileged ports.

- bug fixes:
	rename log() in fsinfo to avoid glibc/gcc-3.3 conflict
	am_pref free NULL pointer
	compiles with modern bison/flex versions
	handles sites with various combos of db, n/dbm, and gdbm

*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0.9:

- Minor new ports:
	i386-apple-darwin6.0
	sparc-sun-solaris2.9

- bugs fixed:

	* handle std{in,out,err} correctly when releasing controlling tty
	  (for real this time)
	* don't cast pointers between enum_t and u_long, it doesn't work on
	  64-bit big-endian platforms

*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0.8:

- Minor new ports:
	i386-pc-linux-rh7.2
	i386-pc-linux-rh7.3
	i386-unknown-freebsd4.4
	i386-unknown-freebsd5.0
	ia64-hp-hpux11.20
	ia64-unknown-linux-rh7.1
	powerpc-ibm-aix5.1.0.0

- Work around IBM's NFSv3 ABI change in aix4.3

- Support network/netmask and network/masklen syntax in in_network()

- Support disabling LDAP and Hesiod support using configure

- Support xfs on Linux

- Red Hat specific Amd startup script included

- Remove (non-functional) autofs code and detection support.  If you want
  autofs support, use am-utils-6.1.

- bugs fixed:

	* hlfsd takes uid 0's home from root's passwd entry instead of
	  defaulting to '/'
	* (not really our bug) Linux ignores the microseconds field in
	  mtime, so hlfsd and amd need to increment the seconds field all
	  the time to prevent symlink caching
	* generic map parsing bug which was rejecting a numerical mount option
	  if it was the last option in the string
	* MacOS X compile bug
	* minor fix for GNU getopt
	* Linux has no "dev" mtab option
	* "nolock" is an NFS mount option, not a generic one
	* Irix N32 ABI fixes with cc
	* security: use mkstemp instead of mktemp
	* correct timeo values for Linux tcp/udp NFS mounts
	* hlfsd use of setuid() not seteuid()
	* AIX ABI changes to nfs_args fixes

*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0.7:

- minor new ports: i386-unknown-freebsd5.0

- bug fixes:
	type:=host, don't fail mount if one share is already mounted
	don't report NFS NE_IO error as success (Linux)

*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0.6:

- new ports:
	Mac OS X support (Darwin, Rhapsody)

- reworked autoconf scripts so that newer versions of known OSs will default
  their configuration to the last known version (better chance that it will
  pass autoconf and work).

- linux support for lofs and "bind" mounts, so type:=lofs can work (whether
  you're using autofs or not)

- renamed amd.conf option "selectors_on_default" to "selectors_in_defaults"
  (on -> in, and added "s").  Old name remains in place for compatibility.

- lots of cleanups of debugging and logging messages

- Bugs fixed:
	lots of Linux-related ones, so it compiles for recent kernels
	better checking on various mount options of the form foo=N or foo=STR
	fixed NFS errno mapping bug which mapped ENOENT to success on Linux

*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0.5:

- Minor ports:
	alphaev6-dec-osf5.1
	i386-unknown-freebsd4.2
	support for Linux 2.4 kernels and newer GLIBC versions
	cleanup of AIX and IRIX6 ports

- Support new mount options:
	proplist (ACLs over NFS, DU-4.0)
	kerb, rdirplus, readdirsize, and xlatecookie (NetBSD-1.5K+)
	nonlm, lock, nolock (Linux)

- Don't force rsize/wsize on Linux 2.2.18+ and 2.4.x.  Improves performance
  a lot.

- Lots of documentation updates: texinfo, man pages, scripts, and more.

- LDAP: included proposed Schema and Internet Draft for LDAP Schema.  See
  README.ldap for more information.

- Removed all remains of the dangerous amq -M code.

- Major bug fix: initialize NFS fileid field correctly, to avoid cache
  aliasing problems, esp. on Linux.

- Major Linux bug fix: map errnos to NFS errors (mistakenly turned off a
  while back).  Also support unused errno 41.

- Other bugs fixes:
	default MAXHOSTNAMELEN (if undefined) is 256, not 64
	truncate hostnames to MAXHOSTNAMELEN (security fix)
	alignment problem in getwire() on ALPHA
	other buf overflow problems (security fixes)
	ctl-amd supports "condrestart" (Red Hat)
	bell char is \g not \a
	lostaltmail verify MAILDIR is defined
	am-eject accepts "floppy" and "cdrom" as args
	other assorted small bug fixes

*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0.4:

- NFSv3 support for Linux and HPUX-11

- new amd.conf [global] options:
	nfs_vers: force all NFS mounts to version 2 or 3
	nfs_proto: force all NFS mounts to udp or tcp

- new debug_options (amd -D):
	hrtime: turns on high-resolution timer if available
	readdir: traces browsable_dirs code
	xdrtrace: traces XDR routines
	(trace: only traces NFS and RPC)

- new amq options:
	-H: shows usage
	-w: translate getpwd() into an Amd path

- new map syntax:
	${dollar}: to include a literal '$' in assignments

- new "opts:=" options:
	ver3: turns on NFS version 3 on some systems (linux)

- updated or minor new ports:
	alpha-dec-osf4.0f
	alphaev6-dec-osf5.0
	i386-pc-linux-rh6.2
	i386-unknown-freebsd3.4

- bugs fixed:
	symlink mtime fixes to avoid u/mount race conditions
	update amq -s failed umounts count correctly
	linux compiles even if efs is available
	linux works with mount(2) option "intr"
	linux works with pcfs and cdfs
	handle std{in,out,err} correctly when releasing controlling tty
	browsable_readdir works on 64-bit kernel architectures
	irs/wire routines compile for bsdi{2,3,4}

*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0.3:

- updated or minor new ports:
	hppa1.0-hp-hpux11.00
	i386-pc-bsdi4.1
	i386-unknown-netbsd1.4.1
	sparc-sun-solaris2.8
	i*86-pc-linux-gnu-rh6.1
	(some preparations for Compaq Tru64)

- new variables ${uid} and ${gid}, return the numeric UID/GID of the user
  (not root) who invokes an amd pathname.  Similar to what hlfsd does.

- automake now uses automatic dependency tracking

- new mount options: optionstr, noexec, nomnttab

- maps of type:=auto are now browsable (using map option "browsable")

- ctl-amd has "status" argument (same as RedHat)

- bugs fixed:
	document buggy AIX 4.3 plock() behavior
	fixes to stale file handle on symlinks
	reduce race conditions upon rapid umount/mount sequences
	use vsnprintf, more secure than vsprintf
	more assorted and smaller bugs

*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0.2:

- safe map reloads: when a map needs to be reloaded, it is reloaded into a
  temporary copy first.  Only if the reload was completely successful, Amd
  discards the old map and uses the new one.  Otherwise Amd continues to use
  the old maps.  This should help a lot with transient NIS problems.

- amq -f now also forces a (safe) map reload, but only if the timestamp on
  the maps was updated.

- two new selector variables: ${vendor} and ${full_os}, which are the same
  as the output seen in "amd -v".

- documentation fixes and updates

- updated or minor new ports:
	i386-unknown-freebsdelf3.3

- support 'ignore' flags (automntfs) in bsdi-4.1

- bugs fixed:
	expn.pl uses correct sockaddr_in() not, pack()
	make sure configure --enable-*args take an argument
	don't busy-loop trying to rebind to ldap servers
	use vsnprintf, not vsprintf (security)

*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0.1:

- updated or minor new ports:
	i386-pc-bsdi4.0.1
	i386-unknown-freebsdelf3.0
	i386-unknown-freebsdelf3.1
	i386-unknown-freebsdelf3.2
	i386-unknown-freebsdelf4.0
	i386-unknown-netbsd1.4
	i386-unknown-openbsd2.5
	powerpc-unknown-linux-gnu

- automount2amd added, a new script to convert Sun automount maps to Amd maps

- new map function netgrpd(ARG), same as netgrp() but matches FQHN

- 'ignore' is a generic mount option

- hesiod info service isup() function to check if service is up

- more Y2K fixes (see README.y2k for the full story)

- using alloca.c on systems that don't have it (hpux9 with /bin/cc)

- configure script reduced in size by using M4/sh loops instead of repeated
  entries

- documentation updates

- too many bugs fixed to list here:
	'addopts' option works with 'remopts' as well as 'opts'
	AIX can perform NFS V.3 mounts explicitly
	NIS is_up fixed, especially for NIS+ running in compatibility mode
	amd -v incorrectly listing file systems that don't really work
	amd's own mounts use reserved ports if possible
	browsable directories works for Linux 2.3 (NFS cookies)
	bsd44 systems check for isofs flags
	bsd44 systems check for new options: norrio, gens, and extatt
	buildall works better on Ultrix's /bin/sh
	compile and build on Linux kernels 2.2 and newer
	compile and build on RedHat Linux 6.0 (glibc 2.1)
	compile and build on Solaris 7 (with or without vendor LDAP)
	completely eliminate all of amd's amq -M code, when not enabled
	correctly interpret failure code of unmount of type:=program
	don't create autofs listener service unless used
	don't list or process amq's -M option unless feature was turned on
	don't turn on/off noconn option if it was already in that state
	ldap info service: don't strcmp null strings
	lostaltmail correctly sets struct sockaddr_in
	make sure Linux systems have configured kernel headers
	test for bsize/namlen fields in nfs_args (linux mount versions 2/3)
	turn off broken NFS V.3 support for HPUX
	use getifaddrs() on bsd44 systems makes wire.c more reliable
	use matching NFS rsize/wsize on Linux 2.0 and 2.[123] kernels.
	verify that RPC requests come from reserved, privileged local ports
	warn when Linux kernel headers mismatch with running kernel
	pawd works for type:=nfsl too

*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0:

- updated or minor new ports:
	hppa2.0w-hp-hpux11.00,
	i386-pc-bsdi4.0
	i386-unknown-freebsd2.2.8
	i386-unknown-netbsd1.3.3
	i386-unknown-openbsd2.4
	mips-sgi-irix6.5
	powerpc-ibm-aix4.3.1.0
	i386-unknown-freebsd3.0 now supports nfs v.3

- ctl-amd and ctl-hlfsd now compatible with RedHat's chkconfig utility

- ctl-amd stop will now wait until amd is down

- libamu.so completely self contained --- does not export any symbols which
  must be defined by the process linking with it.  This is so shared
  libraries could be supported on systems that have restrictive shared
  libraries.

- use latest autoconf, automake, and libtool (off of cygnus' CVS server) to
  support shared libraries on many more platforms.

- posix code cleanups

- bugs fixed:
	case insensitive host match in type:=nfsl
	correct swapped args to kill(2)
	try to avoid a race condition b/t mounting and unmounting
	yp_all support is found in libnsl in RH-5.1 systems

*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0b1:

- updated or minor new ports:
	- *-pc-linux-gnu (glibc2 systems such as RedHat 5.1)
	- sparc-sun-solaris2.7
	- i386-pc-solaris2.7
	- i386-unknown-freebsd3.0 (official release, post 4.4lite port)
	- sparc64-unknown-linux-gnu (RH 5.1 on Sun Sparc Ultra)

- bugs fixed:
	- major memory leak in processing of /defaults
	- core dump if map_type given in amd.conf doesn't exist
	- memory leak in replacement yp_all
	- don't access uninitialized memory in DU 4.0
	- other smaller bugs, see ChangeLog

*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0a16:

- new ports:
	hppa1.0-hp-hpux11.00 (works, not NFS V.3 due to missing headers)
	mips-dec-ultrix4.3 (working, unverified)

- new minor ports:
	i386-pc-bsdi3.1
	i386-unknown-netbsd1.3.1
	alpha-dec-osf2.1

- new options addopt:=ARG will "smartly" add and override options specified
in opts:=

- new amd.conf options:
	pid_file: specifies the file to store the PID
	hesiod_base: specifies the base for the Hesiod service
	unmount_on_exit: if 'yes' will attempt to unmount all file systems
		when amd exits.

- amd.conf file is parsed after all other command line options.  If no
options specified at all, then use /etc/amd.conf by default.

- some variables' values are now compared case-insensitive as per specs,
such as host names, domain names, and more.

- NIS service uses a new isup() function to detect if the service is up
before using it.  Used to ensure amd doesn't clear the existing maps before
reloading them, unless the remote info service is working.

- new cdfs mount options: rrip, noversion, defperm, nodefperm (OSF)

- support efs/xfs separately on irix

- new -D info trace option to turn on info specific debugging, such as
RES_DEBUG for hesiod services.

- document updates and fixes

- new file MIRRORS lists official mirror sites (also in am-utils home page)

- new file BUGS lists known amd/OS bugs

- source restructuring: rename all Amd file-systems' sources to amfs_ARG.c
such that it matches the type:=ARG as well.  Free names afs/dfs for Andrew
F/S and Distributed F/S.

- checkpoint config.guess several times during the long configure, so that
if it is aborted midway, the bulk of the features discovered will be re-read
from the config.cache file.

- more systems support shared libraries (libtool 1.2)

- using automake 1.3 + more fixes

- bugs fixed:
	use dynamic buffer for list of interfaces, not fixed size
	output of amd -H duplicated if >2 interfaces
	-D mem for hlfsd not on by default (so it will daemonize)
	linux looks for ext2fs before ufs
	CDFS looks for 'isofs' mount type as well
	compile on Solaris 2.6 with /opt/SUNWspro/bin/cc
	various additional fixes which gcc 2.8.x reported
	print syslog help string based on what's supported
	correctly ignore loopback interface on SunOS 3.x
	don't use -lucb for strcasecmp
	hlfsd's dump file securely written in /usr/tmp/hlfsd.dump.XXXXXX
	inherit NFS V.3 mounts correctly
	write pid file securely

*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0a15:

- new ports:
	alpha-unknown-linux-gnu: works
	i386-unknown-netbsd1.3: fully working
	*-sun-sunos3: compiles, not tested

- updated ports:
	m68k-next-nextstep3: cleaner compile, works.

- new file system type nfsl (NFS Link).  Uses nfs if file system is remote,
and link if it is local (based on if $rhost equals the host name).

- support for Solaris cachefs.  Requires setting fs, rfs, and a new variable
cachedir.  See documentation for explanation, examples, and caveats.

- support negated selector functions such as !exists(/foo/bar)

- wire, network, netnumber, in_network() selectors now match against all
locally attached networks (by either name or number), not just the first two
interfaces.

- new program pawd (and man page for it) --- Print Automounter Working
Directory, to print the proper pathname of the cwd or any other pathname,
adjusted for automounter paths, while avoiding mount points.

- two new switches to amq: -U will force using UDP only; -T will force using
only TCP to communicate with amd.  If neither (or both) are specified, amq
will try TCP first, and if that failed, will try UDP.

- support syslog facilities, using "amd -l syslog:facility".  Old behavior
when using only -l syslog is to use the LOG_DAEMON facility.

- you may specify browsable_dirs=full, to get a listing of all entries
(other than /default), including those with '*' wildcard and '/'
characters.

- amd -D trace now also includes as much of struct nfs_args as can be
displayed.  Useful in figuring out what the kernel really gets during a
mount(2), as opposed to what the /etc/mnttab file says.  -D trace also
traces the xdr_* functions.

- support for versions of shared libamu version.  upped version from 0.0.0
to 1.0.0.  each am-utils release that will change the library will also
update its version.

- amd/ops_TEMPLATE.c: a new template file for those brave enough to try and
implement a new amd file system.  Includes comments and other info useful
for developers.

- if localconfig.h exists in the current directory during the run of
configure, it is included in all am-utils sources.  This allows courageous
developers to make certain modifications during compilations, and especially
turn off undesired features (not very recommended).

- documentation types and updates for all new features, ports, etc.

- bugs fixed:
	support NFS mount options grpid and maxgrps
	nextstep: set NFS success code to 0 (NFS_OK), not 1 (EPERM)
	bsdi2: set NFS success code to 0 (NFS_OK), not 1 (EPERM)
	set NFS V.3 mount table names to "nfs" if vers/proto exist
	use mkstemp() if possible (more secure)
	ctl-amd looks for amd.conf in ${prefix}/etc after /etc
	hpux: use "ignore" mount table type
	openbsd2.2: turn off "noconn" mount option, so only connected used
	fixed memory leak in hlfsd (don't setpwent after endpwent)
	all NFS3 systems should have proto/vers mount/amd options
	DEBUG_MEM compiles and prints something more useful
	uninit_mntfs(): free() mf_private *after* it is used
	browsable_readdir: fewer bytes sent back to kernel for each chunk
	mount_toplvl: don't free() an automatic variable!
	amd should chdir() to / before daemonzing (for core dumps etc)
	cdfs should be called 'cdfs' not whatever the mnttab type is
	amd -v: don't print "FS:" list twice when >=2 net interfaces

*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0a14:

- updated ports:
	powerpc-ibm-aix4.2.1.0: NFS V.3 works

- minor new ports:
	sparc-sun-sunos4.1.3C
	m68k-sun-sunos4.1.1 (sun3)
	mips-sgi-irix5.2

- new option to amd, -O ARG, will override the operating systems *name* with
ARG.  Corrected documentation for amd -o ARG --- it overrides the operating
system *version* and not the name as the docs incorrectly stated.

- logging now behave more like syslog: will not print repeated strings, but
rather a count such as "last message repeated N times".  (N will not exceed
100.)

- restructured the code which deals with the numerous possible fields and
flags that are set in struct nfs_args.  That code was moved to libamu as
the functions compute_nfs_args() and compute_automounter_nfs_args().

- bugs fixed:
	mnttab name ufs/cdfs/pcfs/etc filesystems corrected
	use pmap_ping for amq (a must for secure portmappers, bsdi2/3)
	test for xfs (irix) as a disk-based filesystem
	set correct nfs_prot headers for Solaris 2.5
	removed stale code from lostaltmail.in
	lostaltmail will look for conf file in multiple locations
	assorted documentation corrections
	amq does not print "get_secure_amd_client" if run as root

*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0a13:

- new in_network(ARG) nomadic selector, true if ARG is the name (or number)
of any of this host's network interfaces.

- removed variables primnetname, primnetnum, subsnetname, and subsnetnum.
(Kept "wire" and its alias "network", and "netnumber".)

- include am-utils.dvi and am-utils.ps in distribution.

- hlfsd supports new option -P ARG, for reading password map off of file
ARG.  Allows you to use the hlfs redirector using paths other than user's
home directories.

- use a replacement yp_all for some systems (irix) known to have a broken
one which leaks a file descriptor each time called.

- if remote NFS server is down or does not support portmap, downgrade
machine to NFS V.2 and retry again later.

- bugs:
	don't redefine yywrap on systems using a modified flex
	use correct "ignore" mnttab/mount option on hpux for df(1)
	use nfs_args' fsname field (hpux) to avoid syncer/mount(1) problems
	don't add ops_ufs.o twice to Makefile's $(OBJS)
	don't fail if autofs listener fails to initialize
	hlfsd should test if run as root after usage() and getopt

- minor code cleanups for netbsd

- html docs now in http://www.am-utils.org

- added README file in binaries ftp directory

*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0a12:

- minor or updated/broken ports fixed:
	hppa1.1-hp-hpux10.10:	compiles, untested (probably works).
	hppa1.1-hp-hpux9.05:	compiles, untested (probably works).
	hppa1.1-hp-hpux9.07:	compiles, untested (probably works).
	m68k-hp-hpux9.00:	compiles, untested (probably works).
	rs6000-ibm-aix4.1.4.0:	compiles, untested.
	sparc-sun-solaris2.6:	works w/ NFS V.3.
	sparc-sun-sunos4.1.4:	compiles, untested (probably works).

- new ports:
	powerpc-ibm-aix4.2.1.0:	compiles w/ NFS V.3, untested.

- wire-test also checks for combinations of NFS protocol/version from the
client to a remote (or local) host.

- conf/mtab/mtab_file.c: use flock() to lock the file, and fcntl() if
flock() is not available.  (Used to prefer fcntl() over flock().)

- bug fixes:
	tli get_nfs_version() gets into an infinite loop
	tli get_nfs_version() should time out faster
	sockets get_nfs_version() should work w/ secure portmappers
	ESTALE returned for NFS mounts for SunOS 4.x fixed
	do not exceed HOSTNAMESZ for nfs_args.hostname (get ENAMETOOLONG)
	properly initialize some mntent_t fields (fsck, freq, mnt_time)
	properly initialize some pcfs_args fields (mask, uid, gid)
	properly initialize some cdfs_args fields (ssector)

*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0a11:

- bug fixes:
	amd could not NFS mount v.2 servers from v.3 clients
	hlfsd will only use first occurrence of home dir for same uid

*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0a10:

- MAJOR DOCUMENTATION UPDATE! (first time in 6 years)

- new ports:
	m68k-next-nextstep3: configures, compiles, not tested.

- preliminary autofs support.  See README.autofs for details.

- new amd.conf [global] yes/no keywords:
	show_statfs_entries:	shows number of entries for df(1)
	fully_qualified_hosts:	use FQHN for NFS/RPC authentication

- detect down remote hosts faster

- log output of "amd -v" at startup

- removed $osver override for solaris: now it is 2.5.1, not 5.5.1

- buildall will use gmake first if available

- bugs fixed:
	amd core dumped when remote host was down
	allow up to 1024 entries back from readdir()
	amd.conf works even if only [global] option defined
	avoid using bad memcmp() implementations
	fixed meaning of plock [global] option (was reversed)
	hlfsd infinite loop unless compiled with --enable-debug
	NIS code works with NIS+ servers in NIS compatibility mode
	reset tag fields in amd.conf so they don't carry to other entries

*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0a9:

- new ports:
	sparc-sun-solaris2.4:
		 configures/compiles, and runs (no NFS V3)
	i386-unknown-openbsd2.1:
		configures/compiles, runs (NFS V3)

- updated ports:
	i486-ncr-sysv4.3.03: configures/compiles, not tested

- Multiple amd support: new amd.conf [global] key "portmap_program" can be
used to specify an alternate RPC program number for amd to un/register.
Allowed numbers range from 300019 to 300029.  A matching new option for amq:
-P prognum, will use an alternate program number to contact.

- man pages:
	amd.conf.5	new
	mk-amd-map.8	new
	amd.8		updated
	amq.8		updated
	(other man pages required minor updates)

- shared libraries support expanded.  Using GNU libtool-1.0.  You can build
a shared version of libamu, and link with it accordingly, by specifying
--enable-shared to configure.  Default is --enable-static --disable-shared,
and you can mix and match.  See "INSTALL" file for listing of systems on
which shared libraries seem to build and work fine.

- new option: amq -p, will return the PID of the running amd (local or
remote).  Uses a new RPC message.  Useful especially in "ctl-amd stop".

- new configure script options --enable-ldflags, for specifying -L flags.
The older --enable-libs is to be used only for -l options.

- two new LDAP map options for amd.conf: ldap_cache_seconds and
ldap_cache_maxmem.

- new script, am-eject from Debian linux's version of amd-upl102.

- additional passwd map support using var[0-3], from Debian folks.

- hesiod code cleanup.  works for hesiod 1.3 as well as 3.0.

- removed defunct -h option from amd.

- started using automake-1.2.  This fixed several bugs that caused some
versions of yacc/lex and non-GNU make to fail.

- bug fixes:
	amd/hlfsd mounts should be hidden from df(1)
	use "noconn" option for nfs mounts (multi-homed hosts)
	don't use connected sockets on linux before 1.3.10 (from Debian)
	better checks for [gn]dbm
	forbid excessive retries after timeouts (from Debian)
	readdir(): don't skip over map entries with prefix, and include it
	more assorted linux fixes from Debian folks
	lofs mount on svr4 was broken
	find default value of $karch from uname() not $arch
	hlfsd failed to mount itself on some little-endians


*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0a8:

- new ports:
	i386-unknown-netbsd1.2.1: configures/compiles (with NFS V.3), works,
				  but some OS stability problems exist.

- updated ports:
	hppa1.1-hp-hpux9.01:
			now tested and working
	rs6000-ibm-aix3.2 and rs6000-ibm-aix3.2.5:
			now tested and working

- fixed browsable directories (readdir) code.

- better methods to find amd/hlfsd pid to kill in ctl-{amd,hlfsd}

- "ignore/auto" mount types fixed for irix, sunos, and others, so "df" does not
show amd mounts by default (but GNU df -a does).

- each time amd is built, a new "build" version is incremented.  See amd -v.

- man page for fsinfo added

- empty fillers for new file (bsd44) systems: nullfs, unionfs, umapfs.

- when amd is not running, or portmapper is down, make amq timeout faster (5
sec) than system default, usually 4-5 minutes.

- bug fixes:
	hlfsd mount got "protocol not supported"
	first regular map in amd.conf didn't inherit global options
	make "bad" versions of lex still work with amd/conf_parse.l
	check for 'nodev' option, not 'nondev'
	typo in "ro" option, and fillers to ac{reg,dir}{min,max} and others
	amd.conf parsing done before switching default log/debug options
	allow doubly-quoted values in amd.conf
	hesiod-reload code cleanup

- assorted code cleanup


*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0a7:

- new ports:
	i386-unknown-freebsd3.0:
			fully functional with NFS V.3
	sparc-sun-solaris2.3:
			fully functional (should work for 2.4)
	sparc-unknown-netbsd1.2E:
			configures/compiles (with NFS V.3), untested

- updated ports:
	i386-pc-bsdi3.0:
			NFS V.3 works
			look for hesiod in libc
	mips-sgi-irix5.3:
			fully functional with NFS V.3

- LDAP support!  New [global] amd.conf options ldap_base and ldap_hostports.
Also includes a new script amd2ldif to convert amd maps into plain text LDAP
object files.

- the following amd.conf variables: browsable_dirs, map_options, map_type,
mount_type, and search_path --- can now be specified in [global] as well as
the map entry itself.  That way you can declare them only once in [global],
and override them as needed per map.

- option "cluster" added to [global] (HPUX clusters ala "amd -C").

- assorted info_hesiod map fixes and cleanup.  removed HESIOD_RELOAD code.

- added netgrp(name) function to amd map syntax to see if current host is in
the <name> netgroup.

- removed unused option "amd -m".

- filled in "tasks" file with todo items.

- filled "COPYING" file with legal stuff.

- cleanup: all global variables are now in one big structure (struct
amu_global_options) that's easy to identify and enhance.  Also migrated
several flags that used be an integer each into one unsigned integer that's
used as a bit-flag.

- big fixes:
	xdr_mountres3 should compile only if has NFS V3
	lex/yacc macros show full pathname (to tell if correct one runs)
	misc fixes/cleanup


*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0a6:

- amd configuration file!

See scripts/amd.conf-sample for help and some explanation.  This new conf
file allows for the following new features:

	default selectors can be turned on/off globally.
	browsable_dirs/readdir() support can be turned on per map.
	search paths for file type maps.
	can force the map type to file, nis, ndbm, etc. rather than default
		to looking at all of them.
	tag each map for "amd -T tag", useful for grouping maps.
	can override $os and others (so if you don't like "sunos5" default
		naming, set os=sos5 and it will work with your old maps).
	and more goodies...

- enable-default-selectors: No longer turned on by the configure script or
optionally compiled.  Code made dynamic and can be turned on or off from the
amd.conf file.  This code is off by default, and must be turned on by
amd.conf's [global] section.

- new ports:
	mips-sgi-irix5.3:	configure/compile, not tested
	i486-ncr-sysv4.3.03:	configure/compile, not tested

- updated ports:
	alpha-dec-osf4.0:	major code redone
	sparc-sun-sunos4.1.3:	fixed and working
	mips-sgi-irix6.2:	tested with gcc and "cc -32 -Wl,-woff,84"
	mips-sgi-irix6.4:	tested with gcc and "cc -32 -Wl,-woff,84"

- better NFS3 port, including more support for proto= and vers=, and
automatic determination of proto/vers combination.

- conf/nfs_prot/nfs_prot_*.h: all of the NFS protocol header files had to be
redone, because of the osf4 port.  OSF used very different names for these,
and they conflicted with am-utils'.  The only solution was to more or less
conform to OSF4's naming, and change all the others.

- ctl-amd script:
	improved to look for amd.conf in $prefix/etc and /etc
	better methods for finding the pid of amd to kill

- autoconf support for LDAP.  amd/info_ldap.c needs to be written.

- wire-test also reports the local IP address.  Some systems have multiple,
buggy version of get_myaddress(), esp. SunOS and Irix.  Note that Solaris
x86 has a buggy htonl().

- amd -H prints usage.

- bugs fixed:
	minor TLI problem in fwd_socket
	mount options properly comma delimited
	LIBS is set only to the right set of libraries to include
	selectors-on-default code ignored last selector ent in /defaults
	assorted code cleanups


*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0a5:

- NFS Version 3 support!!!

	Works on Solaris 2.5.1.
	Minimal testing done on Irix 6.
	Compiles cleanly on DU-4.0 but no tests performed.

Will fall back to V2 mounts when V3 is not available.  Will also use TCP if
possible, UDP otherwise.

- Ports to new platforms:

	alpha-dec-osf4.0		(not tested)
	i386-pc-bsdi3.0			(tested and working)
	i386-unknown-freebsd2.2.1	(tested and working)
	sparc-unknown-linux-gnu		(tested and working)

- New scripts added:

	amd2sun:	convert amd maps to Sun automount maps
	ctl-amd:	script to start/stop/restart amd
	ctl-hlfsd:	script to start/stop/restart hlfsd
	expn:		expand mail alias (used by hlfsd)
	lostaltmail:	redeliver "lost" mail redirected by hlfsd
	lostaltmail.conf-sample:	sample conf file for lostaltmail
	wait4amd:	run a command once amd is up on a host
	wait4amd2die:	wait for an amd process to die before returning

- "amd -v" now includes more info and "amq -v" lists all of it.

- new parser for linux specific mount options.

- Main bugs fixed:

	"new toplvl readdir" bug caused amd to dump core
	handler for SIGCHLD didn't check for all possible children
	hlfsd leaking file descriptors when home file system was full
	cdfs/pcfs mounts should not timeout by default
	hesiod domain names should be compared in case-insensitive manner
	several printfs in amq were missing \n


*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0a4:

- amd services both TCP and UDP amq requests.  This will help because of the
limited UDP message size.

- "amq -M" code is disabled by default because it is insecure.  It is
rarely used.  Users who wish to use it should run
"configure --enable-amq-mount".


*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0a3:

- New tested ports (configures, compiles, and runs):

	i386-unknown-freebsd2.2

- New ports (configures and compiles correctly, not tested):

	rs6000-ibm-aix3.2.5
	rs6000-ibm-aix4.1.5.0

- More am-utils programs ported to all existing platforms: hlfsd, fsinfo,
mk-amd-map, and fixmount.

- Shared libraries: a new configure option --enable-shared will build a
shared libamu.so, link applications with it, and use it.  Reduces binary
sizes by 20-30%.  This is the first step towards loadable modules, as many
changes had to be done to be able to compile and use PIC code.  This is code
that obviously needs to be generalized to be able to build shared libraries
on many other platforms.  It was only tested on Solaris 5.5.1.

- the file INSTALL contains the latest compatibility table of which
platforms am-utils configures, compiles and runs on.

- Trimmed down the size of the configure script.  Some tests that are not
used anywhere were removed.


*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0a2:

- New ports (configures and compiles correctly, not tested):

	i386-pc-bsdi2.1
	hppa1.1-hp-hpux9.01
	hppa1.1-hp-hpux10.20

- new configure options:

	--enable-cppflags[=ARG]
		configure/compile with ARG (-I) preprocessor flags
	--enable-libs[=ARG]
		configure/compile with ARG (-L/-l) library flags

- filesystem, mount table entries, and mount type tests can now look in
/lib/modules and /proc/filesystems for statically/dyadically loadable kernel
modules (linux)

- prefer vfat over msdos/pc/etc filesystem for PCFS.

- moved all fixed headers to include/am_defs.  Left only #define/#undef
entries in aux/acconfig.h.

- make more sense of systems that have full, partial, or no NFS protocol
headers.

- minor fixes for NetBSD (untested platform).

- hesiod map fixed.

- buildall -D: new option to run even stricter developer options.

- lots of other bugs fixed (see ChangeLog).


*** Notes specific to am-utils version 6.0a1:

I have it configure and build correctly for the following systems:

	i386-pc-solaris2.5.1
	i386-unknown-freebsd2.1.0
	mips-sgi-irix6.2
	sparc-sun-solaris2.5.1
	sparc-sun-sunos4.1.3

Amq, wire-test, and "amd -v" work on all of the above.  A real running amd
was only tested and confirmed working on

	i386-pc-solaris2.5.1
	sparc-sun-solaris2.5.1

Many things are still missing: options, features, etc.  But for now, let's
concentrate on getting the basic functionality working on the more popular
systems.
